Soc Major Survival Guide

So here you are, majoring in sociology.........

Want to know why we make you take what we make you take? 

Want to understand what the hell you need to get a sociology degree and what you might do with that little piece of paper?  

This little survival guide attempts to explain the thinking behind the courses you will be required to take, as well as those you may choose from.  Before we talk about these, let's deal with why folks become sociology majors and what they do with that degree.   

The fact of the matter is, people become sociology majors for a variety of good and sometimes not so good reasons.  Some arrive at sociology because they flunked out of other programs.  Some don't know what they want to do with their lives but they know they need a degree to have the kind of life they want.  Some have been in college a while, you know, the 5, 6, and 7 year plan, have racked up a lot of hours, the folks are breathing down their necks for them to graduate, and they just want to finish college.  Some people major in sociology because they think it's an "easy" major.  And the list goes on and on.  Last but not least, there is a rare group of folks that actually major in sociology because they are intrigued by what it has to tell us about human societies and the human experience.   That is, they recognize the implications of understanding why people do what they do, and when they might do it.  Regardless of how you got here, you're here.   Welcome.  With that said, this little guidebook is meant to help you understand the thinking behind the courses you will take as you try to complete your degree.  We encourage you to read it and come back to it from time to time, especially when you are wondering why in the hell you are studying this field or taking classes you think are stupid.  Revisiting what we have to say may also help you: 

1) Know what you need to do to get out of here with that degree and why you need to do it.

&

2) Remember the sociological "big picture" and how the courses you will take fit together to make that big picture.  The point is, we don't make you take these classes to simply torture you.  They are part of a bigger picture and much thought have gone into them.  

Before we talk about why you have to take what you have to take, lets be clear on just what sociology is, why its relevant and important, what sociologists do, and why they do it.  

So, What is Sociology?
Simply put, sociology is the "systematic" study of human societies/groups with specific attention being paid to how social "structures" affect and shape humans.  Unlike psychology that tends to focus on the internal processes in human experience, sociologists examine how largely external forces impact us.   

What's the point of sociology?
* To uncover patterns and generalities present in human behavior.

Although many of us like to think we are these unique, one of a kind "individuals," in control of our own lives, choices, and future, it's simply not that easy.  All of us are impacted and shaped by a variety of social "forces" such as our families, the media, our education, our government, our religion, the culture we group up in, etc.  Because of this fact, what we feel, what we think is right and wrong, what we enjoy and want out of life, how we act and what we believe are all shaped by these factors and those around us.  We are not mere individuals, immune to.

* To understand how people make sense out of their actions and beliefs.

Since you are fortunate enough to be in an "applied" sociology program, another point of sociology is to change those things that might be in need of change.  In other words, one role of sociology is as we come to understand patterns in behavior and what social forces are at play, we are sometimes empowered to do something about them.  So for many sociologists, the point is to "change the world," in both small and large ways.  
 



What do sociologists do?

What does someone with a sociology degree do?  In other words, will I be able to get a job if I get my degree and what kind of job can I get?  We'll talk about this in a bit but let's deal with what you have to take and why you have to take it. 


Why do we make you take the courses we make you take?

Ok, the truth is we only "make you" take a few courses and then you get to choose those you want to take.  In fact, most sociology programs only force students to take 3 specific classes and then you can basically choose what else you want to take.  The three mandated classes typically include sociological theory, research methods, and statistics.  This is why, or at least the "sociological" thinking behind these three course.

Theory, methods, and statistics kind of serve as the foundation of sociology.  Again, remember that the point of sociology is to study human societies "systematically" in order to understand the forces that shape human behavior.  So the three courses help us have a system to study social behavior.   All three play a part in that system, and the cool thing about having a system is that we can back up the claims or predictions we make about people/groups.  

How do these courses form this system?  Well each one plays a part.  Theory, generally speaking, is how we go about describing 

Research methods courses are our attempt to teach you how sociologists go about conducting their research in a planned, very thought out manner.  Because the claims and observations sociologist make about society and human behavior can't merely be their "opinions" about things, 
